All right, welcome along
to the Foreign Affairs Defense and Trade Committee.
It is a pleasure to have the opportunity
to welcome the Vietnamese delegation to New Zealand
and to our committee today.
Um,
So this stage of the meeting is in public session, as is
a normal standard for New Zealand.
We have 15 minutes for this session
for introductory comments.
I'd like to take this opportunity to
reiterate the importance of the relationship
between New Zealand and Vietnam.
We are celebrating now 50 years of diplomatic relations,
and I think we have had some very productive high level
meetings in the last couple of years,
including the agreement for our, the launch
of our comprehensive strategic partnership.
And our Prime Minister visited Vietnam this year.
Our committee here is made up
of members from governing parties
and members from opposition parties as well.
This is a normal select committee structure for New Zealand.
I'd like to now hand over to you for introductory comments,
and thank you again for
taking the time to visit New Zealand.
Um, Mr. Uh, team Devan Moland, um, uh, chairpersons
of the committees, uh, on defense
and trait of the parliaments of New Zealand,
and also members of the committee.
First of all, on behalf of the dedication, I would like
to thank you so much for the times
and for hospitality for welcoming us to a very beautiful,
uh, country to New Zealand.
Thank you.
Let me just reiterate what you just mentioned.
Um, early on, we all know that this year, Vietnam
and New Zealand celebrating the 50th anniversary
of our government heights.
And, uh, based on the, um, good growth of the relationship
between the two country, our leaders, uh, have upgraded, uh,
the relationship to a new height, which is the comprehensive
strategic partnership earlier this year.
And, uh, in celebrating the 50th anniversary
of Informatic Heights between the two countries,
the Japanese National Assembly setting, the delegation, uh,
which is, um, the committees, um, on defense, security
and foreign affairs visiting New Zealand in order
to strengthen the relationship
between the two parliament and two country.
And also to learn from Brazil
and, uh, the members of the delegations, uh, deputies
of the NASA assembly, and also, uh, uh, senior
military officer and, uh, senior, uh, officers
of the public security.
So, joining me in, uh, joining me in our application, uh,
today, uh, I would like to introduce the members
of the application, uh, sitting next to me, uh, n General,
um, uh, deputy, uh, chairperson of the committee.
Um, also, uh, n general, um,
uh, deputy, uh, chairpersons of, um, the committee.
Um, and, um, also, um, um, Nana General,
um, chief Commanders
of the number nine military res, uh, of, uh, the, uh, uh,
ministries of defense of Vietnam.
Um, major whom, uh, standing members
of the committees on defense, security and foreign affairs
and major general with Vietnam is, uh, heads of the,
uh, criminal institutes under the Ministry
of Public Security.
Uh, also joining, uh, our litigation, uh, uh, the four, uh,
who, uh, members are staff of the committees, um,
in the Department for Defense Security
and for I affairs, uh, under the, uh, NASA Assembly
of Vietnam and joining, uh, um, our, uh, dedication.
Uh, also, uh, like to introduce our ambassador here,
the ambassador to New Zealand, his exam, so may have worked
with him and not him before.
And also, um, Mr.
Uh, he's a, he's based in,
uh, Australia.
So, um, Mr. Chairman and also members, uh, of the committee.
Uh, we, um, visit New Zealand, uh, first of all,
uh, uh, giving us the opportunity
to witness very few beautiful, uh, country New Zealand,
but on of course, uh, professionally, uh,
and from the, uh, views of, uh, um, people
and staff as the members of, uh, the committee.
We could like to learn from you
and we would like to hear from you, um, the, uh,
relationship between Vietnam and New Zealand.
Uh, more particularly, uh, relationship between, uh,
committees of, uh, PAs of both countries,
and also the parliamentary relationship
between the two country, uh, as well as the collaboration,
uh, between the two countries in the fields
of defense and security.
Uh, I,
Uh, Mr.
Chairman and members of the committee, um, as you know, uh,
all, um, speaker speaking Vietnam next week.
And of course, uh, we, uh, expect to see, um, the, uh,
officer, um, box between, uh, our two, uh, chairperson
and, uh, uh, I'm sure that they will exchange views, uh, on,
uh, how to strengthen the relationship
between the two departments.
But at the committee level, we would like to hear from you
more, particularly the experience in, uh, law making,
uh, in the fields of, uh, so, um, expertise, uh, defense
and also, uh, trait.
And,
And I know that you also have a lot of experience in, uh,
building, um, and, uh, developing laws on, uh, many times
on defense, on security,
and more particularly on model effects.
So we would like to hear from the, uh, the experience, um,
in, uh, contributing to the developments of those logs
between the parliament of New Zealand,
and of course, um, um, as we all know that,
and we are grateful for New Zealand, uh,
that have supported Vietnam in, uh, uh,
deploying our peacekeeping forces.
And we also want to hear from you as our view as well on,
uh, collaboration in that field as well. Thank you.
Very good. Right. Well, thank you very much
for those opening comments.
Um, our committee
is very interested in discussing those
issues and, and others.
And I think it's important to note that the relationship
between our countries has continued to strengthen,
and I think at the committee level as well, that's a piece
of the work we are looking to do is
to help New Zealand grow its profile internationally.
That has been a strong focus for the government as well,
to make sure that we are reconnecting internationally
and have good relationships.
In terms of the committee's work
so far over this parliamentary term,
our priority has been largely on trade
related issues, expanding existing trade agreements
and creating new trade agreements.
So that has been the bulk of the committee's focus,
although more recently we have seen a shift towards defense
with the announcement of our defense capability plan
and also a strong foreign affairs focus,
particularly in the Pacific region
and in Southeast Asia region.
So we now are halfway through our time this morning,
and our introductory comments I think are complete.
I appreciate the desire to move now to
a more private focus on this session,
and so we will end the live streaming
and can continue our discussion.
Well, uh, very lucky to.